lets now move on to the topic The Age of Harshvardhana.
King Harshvardhana decided that he must subdue the petty warring rulers and bring them
under his domain. He devoted six important years of his life to do so. Hiuen Tsang, a
Chinese traveller and Bana Bhat, his court poet, have given detailed accounts of Harsha's
reign. According to Hiuen Tang, King Harshvardhana had an efficient government. He
further tells us that families were not registered and there was no forced labour,
Harsha's religious activities
Do you know that Harsha built many hospitals and rest houses? He also gave grants to
many religions especially Buddhism and Hindu Religion. Later in his life Harsha became
more inclined towards Buddhism.
Harsha's literary activities had some important plays e.g. Nagananda Ratnavali and
Priyadarsita. He collected learned men around him as is evident from the report of Hiuen
Tsang and Bana Bhat. Bana wrote Harsha's famous biography, Harshcharita as well as the
literary piece Kadambari.
Kingdoms of the Deccan and the South: You have read about the Satavahanas who
controlled the Deccan for a long time. After their decline, many small kingdoms came up in
the Deccan. The first one among them was that of the Vakatakas, who tried to build a
strong state, but they did not last long
After the Vakatakas came the Chalukyas of Vatapi and Kalyani. Pulakesin was a powerful
ruler of the Chalukya dynasty. The Chalukyas kept fighting with the Rashtrakutas (towards
the north) and the Pallavas (towards the south). The Chalukya rule came to an end in 753
A.D. when the Rashtrakutas defeated them.
The capital city of Vatapi was a prosperous one. There were trade relations with Arabia,
Iran and the Red Sea port to the west, as well as with South-East Asia. Pulakesin II sent
an ambassador to king Khusrao II of Persia. The Chalukyas patronised art as well as
religion. They build temples and cave shrines in the deccan hills. Many of the sculptures of
the Ellora caves were created at this time under the patronage of the Chalukyas and the
Rashtrakutas.
lets know about the CULTURAL DEVELOPMENT DURING THE GUPTA
 PERIOD.
The last phase of ancient Indian history starts in early fourth century A.D. and ends in
about the 8th A.D. The Guptas built a strong and powerful kingdom and under the political
unity and state patronage that was provided by them, cultural activities increased manifold.
You will recall that following the Greek invasion, various art forms in India had been
markedly influenced by Graeco-Roman styles. This art mainly depicted the Buddha or
Buddhist thought. But during the Gupta period art became more creative and Hindu gods
and goddesses also came to be portrayed.
The artistic achievement of the age is exhibited in the delicate workmanship and the variety
of designs shown in different kinds of Gupta coins. The general scheme that was followed
was to exhibit the portrait of the king on one side of the coin or an appropriate goddess with her associated symbols on the other side. The king is shown in many positions -
shooting a tiger or a lion, playing a musical instrument seated on a high backed couch etc.
On the reverse in most cases was Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth and in some cases
Saraswati, the goddess of knowledge and arts.
Besides coins, Gupta art found adequate expression in monuments and sculptures. The
skilled artists of this age used their tools and skills to express the ideals and philosophical
traditions of India through various art forms. They decorated even the niches and corners
of religious places with statues of gods and goddesses. The images of gods were treated
as symbols representing attributes associated with the gods. Hence the god were shown
having four or eight arms in each carrying a symbol or an ayudha (weapon) although they
were depicted in human forms. Stone, terracotta, and other materials were used to construct
the abodes of gods and goddesses.
Examples of the Gupta art can be seen at the dashavatara temple at Deogarh and the
cave temples in Udaigiri hills. However, the most famous examples of Gupta art that still
remain are the numerous seated and standing images of Buddha from Sarnath.
The school of art that thrived at Sarnath provides us with some of the most pleasing and
graceful images of the Buddha. Besides stone, Gupta artists were also skilled in bronze. A
two metre high bronze image of Buddha has been discovered at Sultanganj (near Bhagalpur
in Bihar). Examples of sculptures in caves created during this period are traced to the
famous Ellora Caves.
Architecture
The Gupta architecture has survived in a few shrines, rock cut caves (Ajanta) and temples,
such as the Dashavatara temple at Deogarh. These structures were mainly made of stone
and bricks. Some references in the works of Kalidasa give us a glimpse of Gupta
architecture. The poet has given a vivid picture of a well-planned town with a network of
roads, market places, big sky-touching palaces and mansions with terraces. The palaces
had many inner apartments. They had court-yards, prisons, court-room and sabhagriha.
Their verandahs opened on roofs lit with moon-beam at night. The pleasure garden which
was attached to palace contained all sorts of seasonal flowers and trees.
Archaeological evidence about Gupta architecture is however poor. However, examples
of Gupta shrines have been discovered in the jungles of Central India, especially in the
Bundelkhand region. These include the one at Bhitargaon in Kanpur district.
Painting
Painting as an art form reached a high degree of perfection during the Gupta times. The
wall frescoes at the Ajanta caves (Aurangabad) and the one at Bagh caves (near Gwalior)
bear evidence of this. Although Ajanta paintings belong to the period between the first to
the seventh century AD yet most of these were produced during the Gupta time. These paintings depict various scenes from the life of the Buddha. The skill with which the human,
animal and plant figures have been drawn shows the refined and sensitive nature of Gupta
art. The conception of beauty was a characteristic of Gupta art. Expression through art
was given importance as it was regarded as a means for the attainment of spiritual joy.
3.11 THE PALLAVAS AND THE CHOLAS
Any account of ancient India is incomplete without referring to the two dynasties of South
India i.e. the Pallavas and the Cholas and their contribution to art, architecture, administration
and conquests. Quite a few
dynasties rose in the South
from the early centuries of the
Christian era. Among them the
Pallavas were great patrons of
art and architecture. The
ratha at Mahabalipuram style
of temples built by them were
fine examples of rock-cut
temples. The Pallavas also
built structural temples like the
Kailashanath and
Vaikunthperumal temples at
Kanchipuram. The
Kailashanath temple is a huge
structure with thousands of
images and is said to be the largest single work of art ever undertaken in India. There is
also a set of bas reliefs found at Mahabalipuram (Mamallapuram) which is attributed to
the pallava period. The
Pagodas built at
Mahabalipuram go back to the
first century AD.
Temple building activity
flourished in India from the 5th
century AD onwards. While the
North Indian temples were built
in the Nagara style consisted
of the shikaras (spiral roofs),
the garbhagriha (sanctum) and
the mandap (pillared hall), the
temples in the South were built
in the Dravida style completed with vimana or shikhara, high walls and the gateway topped by gopuram. After the Pallavas
(6th to 8th century AD) the tradition of building temples was further developed by the
Cholas (l0th - 12th century AD) in the south.
Do you know that the temple was the central place in the village? It was the gathering
place for the villagers who would come here everyday and exchange ideas and discuss all
matters of common interests. It served as a school too. During festival days dances and
dramas were also performed in the temple courtyard.
The achievements of the Cholas also lie in their conquests across the seas and developing
democratic institutions for governance at the village level. The village panchayat called
sahha or ur had extensive powers. It had control over finances too. This body included
several committees which looked after various aspects of village administration. A very
detailed account of the functioning of the sabhas is available from one of the Chola
inscriptions. The Chola rulers were also great builders. The Dravida style of temple
architecture reached its zenith under the Chola rulers. One of the finest example of this
style is the Rajarajeshwar or Brihadeshwara temple. During this period one also notices
great achievements in the field of sculpture.
Great progress was made in literature both religious and secular. Sanskrit also became the
language of the courts in many parts of the country. Tamil literatures also made great
progress. The Alvars and the Nayanars, the Vaishnavite and Shaivite saints made lasting
contributions to it. Inspite of the dominants position of Sanskrit in most parts of the country,
this period marks the beginning of many Indian languages as well as distinct scripts in
different parts of the country. In short, we can say that by the time, the ancient period of
Indian history came to an end, India had developed a culture which was marked by features
that have characterized it ever since.
our next topic is the TRANSFORMATION OF VEDIC BRAHMANISM INTO
PURANIC HINDUISM.
The transformation of the ancient brahmanical faith into modern Hinduism can be regarded
as the most distinguishing feature from the Gupta period onwards. Buddhism no longer
received as much royal patronage as it did earlier. Brahmanism had come to the forefront.
The Gupta rulers especially provided filling to the Bhagavata Sect of Hinduism. They
called them selved Bhagavatas, worshipped Lord Vishnu performed Asvamedha yajnas,
gave large donations to brahmanas, and built many temples. The Puranas were finally
compiled in this age. Vishnu emerged as the god of devotion and came to be represented
as the preserver of dharma. Numerous legends gathered around him and a whole Purana
called Vishnu Purana was compiled in his honour. Similarly a law book called the
Vishnusmriti was also named after him. Above all, by the fourth century AD there came
into being a famous Vaishnava work called Shrimadbhagavad-purana which taught
devotion to Lord Krishna. A few Gupta kings also were worshippers of Shiva, the god of destruction. Bhagavatism which was a contemporary to Buddhism and Jainism in origin
and owed its birth to the stream of thought which began with Upanishads reached its zenith
and became the most popular sect during this age. The theory of Ten Avatars or incarnations
of the supreme god Vishnu came to be accepted and among them, Krishna was considered
the most important.
Besides Vishnu, Brahma, Surya, Kartikeya, Ganesha, Durga, Lashmi, Saraswati and others
were also worshipped as were lesser gods like Indra, Varuna, Yama etc. The snakes, the
yakshas, and the Gandharvas also continued to be revered. Even animals, plants, rivers
and mountains were looked upon with reverence and cities like Banaras and Prayag became
places of pilgrimage. Idol worship became popular. Thus the prominent features of modern
Hinduism took shape during the Gupta period.
Although Buddhism was on its decline, yet it continued to have its following. Besides the
artistic creations of Ajanta and Ellora, the images of Sarnath Buddha belonging to this time
show that Buddhism was also quite popular. Even Jainism commanded some following
during the Gupta period.
lets now learn about  NALANDA'S EMERGENCE AS A GREAT CENTRE OF
LEARNING.
Nalanda became a great centre of learning during Harsha's reign. Students from different
parts of the world came here to imbibe learning. Although all the remains mounds of
Nalanda have not yet been excavated, yet the evidence of a huge complex of buildings has
been uncovered. Some of these were as many as four storey high. According to Hiuen
Tsang, Nalanda housed as many as 10,000 students. It was supported by the revenues of
200 villages.
Although this huge monastic-educational establishment was primarily a centre for learning
of Mahayana Buddhism, yet the curriculum included secular subjects as well. Grammar,
logic, epistemology and sciences were taught here. Students were encouraged to develop
a spirit of enquiry and reasoning. Active discussions and debates were taking place. Harsha
is said to have invited a thousand learned monks of Nalanda to take part in the philosophical
assembly at Kanauj. In his account, Hieun-Tsang has given a detailed account of Nalanda.
Thus university continued to be the centre of intellectual activity till the twelfth century. 3.14 CHRISTIANITY IN INDIA
According to tradition, christianity was brought to India by Saint Thomas in the first century
A.D. According to legends, the Parthian king Gondophernes (C. 19- 45 A.C.) sent a
messanger to Syria to look for a skilful architect who would build for him a new city. The
messanger returned with St. Thomas, who converted him and many members of his court
to Christianity. The truth of the legend is doubtful. It was most probably the frequent trade
and movement between India and the west which was responsible for bringing this disciple
of Lord Christ to India. The merchants, traders and even craftmen frequently travelled
along popular land and sea routes. St. Tomas preached christianity in many parts of India.
He was killed at Mylapore (near Madras). The tomb of St. Thomas is still to be found at
the same place. A large community of christians known as Syrian Christians contine to
reside in Kerala even today.
The Christian Church has two major divisions-the Roman Catholic church and the Protestant
church. The holy book of the Christians is the Bible. The Bible contains two parts: the old
Testament and the New Testament. The Bible today is available in all major langauges
spoken in our country.
Today, we have over one and a half crore Christians in India. Several charitable institutions
under their patronage are flourishing in all parts of our country. Perhaps the most famous
Christian social worker, he has contributed a great deal for the welfare of the poor and
home less in our country.
