ANCIENT INDIA.
Do you think that the culture of Indian people has been the same since the beginning?

The answer is no. No culture remains the same. And this is true of India as well.
It has gone through many phases of change. Do you know why these changes
occur? This is because every dynasty, every invader who comes and settles down in the
country leaves their marks on the culture of that country. In order to understand the present
culture of Indian people, it is necessary to understand the process it has gone through in
the past. Thus, in this lesson we will attempt to take a look at the life of the people of
Ancient India. You will read about the various stages of ancient Indian history from the
Harappan times through Vedic, Mauryan and Gupta periods. The emphasis is on the
changing nature of Indian society with corresponding changes in society and culture. When
we read history we can understand how the modern world has emerged over long centuries
of development. It is important to appreciate what we have achieved in the past to make
our future worthwhile.
OBJECTIVES of this lesson ;
After reading this lesson you will be able to.
1. appreciate the importance and relevance of studying history.
2. recognise the Harappan culture as the first known urban culture in India.
3. examine the nature of Vedic society, religion and philosophy.
4. explain reasons for the rise of Jainism and Buddhism.
5. trace the early history of south India during this period.
6. review significant cultural developments during the rule of successive empires.
7. examine the general dynamism of cultural developments in ancient India.
 let us now know about the IMPORTANCE OF STUDYING HISTORY the Ages.
I am sure you have often asked yourself why you are studying history. Studying history is
one way of getting to know the past. History is an attempt to understand how and why our
ancestors lived as they did, what difficulties they met with and in what manner they overcame
them. It is important for you to be acquainted with the past to understand better what is
happening in the India of today. After going through this lesson you will come to know the
story of your country, which started many centuries ago.
History is no longer treated as merely a study of dates and events and that too largely only
political events. Its scope has been widened to include many aspects of life. These include
the study of patterns of life, which we call culture. Culture was once defined as that which
relates to art, architecture, literature and philosophy. Now it includes all the activities of a
society. Therefore the emphasis of history has shifted from the study of only the upper
groups of society to all levels of society. It now covers information on kings and statesmen
as well as on ordinary people who make history. It includes the study of art and architecture,
of the evolution of langauges in India, literature and religion. Now we do not look only at
what was happening at the aristocratic level of society. We also try to reconstruct the
interests and concerns of people at lower levels. This makes history more interesting and
helps us understand our society for better.
The people that went into the making of our society, at both the aristocratic and the ordinary
level, were not all indigenous to India, to start with. Many came from other regions and
settled down in India. They married locally, intermixed with the exisiting people and became
a part of Indian society. Our society, therefore, has a rich heritage of different kinds of
people. Because of this large variety of people, there has been an equally large variety of
religions, langauges, and customs in our country.
The correct understanding of history depends on two things. One is a careful and critical
use of source material given to us by historians defending certain statements which should
be decided on rational analysis. Secondly, historical events have causes and these causes
should be fully examined. Above all, even the past must be subjected to a critical analysis.
It is only in this way that historical knowledge will advance.
The past of India goes back several thousand years. We learn about it from the evidence
which our ancestors have left behind. For the near past we have written and printed
records. For times when printing was not known, there are records written by hand on
paper. But earlier still, when paper was not made, records were written on dried palm
leaves, the bark of the birch tree and plates of copper and in some cases, they were
inscribed on large rocks, pillars, stones walls or tablets made of clay and stone. There was
a time still further back when even writing was unknown. Our knowledge of the life of
people in those ancient days comes from the objects which they left behind, for example,their pottery or their weapons and tools. These are things which are solid and which you
can see and touch and these have sometimes to be literally dug out of the earth. They are
all clues in the game of a historical treasure hunt but they form a part of our culture. But
these clues can be of many kinds. The clues most commonly used are manuscripts.
Manuscripts are ancient books, written either on dried palm leaves or the thick bark of the
birch tree, or on paper. (Generally the latter kind have survived, though books written on
paper are not as old as the others). Some of the languages in which the very old books are
written are languages which we in India do not use in everyday life any more, such as Pali
and Prakrit. Others are written in Sanskrit and Arabic, which we still study and sometimes
use in our religious ceremonies although we do not use them at home. Another language
Tamil, which is spoken in South India and whose literature goes to an early period in used
even today. These are called ‘classical langauges’ and the history of many parts of the
world is recorded in various classical langauges. In Europe, ancient manuscripts were
often writen in Greek and Latin; in western Asia, they were written in Arabic and Hebrew,
and in China, classical Chinese was used.
our next topic is ANCIENT INDIA.
India has a continuous history covering a very long period. Evidence of neolithic habitation
dating as far back as 7000 BC has been found in Mehrgarh in Baluchistan. However, the
first notable civilization flourished in India around 2700 BC in the north western part of the
Indian subcontinent, covering a large area. The civilization is referred to as the Harappan
civilization. Most of the sites of this civilization developed on the banks of Indus, Ghaggar
and its tributaries.
The culture associated with the Harappan civilization is the first known urban culture in
India. The Harappans built the earliest cities complete with town planning, sanitation,
drainage system and broad well-laid roads. They built double storied houses of burntbricks
each one of which had a bathroom, a kitchen and a well. The walled cities had other
important buildings such as the Great Bath, Grannaries and Assembly Halls.
Agriculture was the main occupation of the Harappans who were living in rural areas.
Those living in the cities carried on internal and external trade and developed contacts with
other civilizations such as Mesopotamia. They were excellent potters. Various types of
utensils, toys, seals, figurines have been excavated from different sites. Harappans also
had the technical knowledge of metals and the process of alloying. The bronze sculpture of
a dancing girl found in Mohenjodaro testifies the sculptural skills and aesthetic sense of the
Harappans. Shell, ivory, bone and faience were used as material for different crafts and
objects. Lothal was a dockyard situated in Dholaka Taluk of Ahmedabad in Gujarat. It
was also a well planned wall city. It was an important centre of sea trade with the western
world. Another important town in Gujarat was Dhaulavira while Kalibangam was in
Rajasthan.
Numerous seals carrying the images of the one-horned rhinocerous known as unicorn,
peepal leaves and a male god throw light on the religious beliefs of the Harappans. It
appears that they worshipped plants and animals and the forces of nature. They worshipped
a male god resembling Lord Shiva of later times and a mother goddess among others.
They probably believed in life after death and also in charms and spells. Seals engraved
with animal figures like the humped bull, elephant and rhinocerous suggest that these animals
were considered sacred. ‘Peepal’ has been found depicted on many seals.
Harappans knew how to write and most of their seals contain some form of script. But
unfortunately no one has yet been able to decipher that script. As a result, our knowledge
of the Harappan civilization is based on the archaeological evidence alone. The figures of
men and women on various seals found in the excavations reveal that the people knew the
art of spinning and weaving. They were perhaps the first people to cultivate cotton. A large
number of Indus seals found in Mesopotamia which indicated of a possible trade between
the Indus valley and Mesopotamian civilization.
By 1800 BC the Harappan civilization began declining. However, we do not know the
exact reasons why this happened.
let us now learn about the VEDIC CULTURE.
A few centuries after the decline of the Harappan civilization, a new culture flourished in
the same region and gradually spread across the Ganga-Yamuna plains. This culture came
to be known as the Aryan culture. There were significant differences between this culture
and the culture which preceded it.
Aryans settled on the banks of rivers Indus (Sindhu) and Saraswati (which is now non
existent). They composed many hymns in honour of the gods and goddesses they
worshipped. These were compiled in four Vedas - the Rig Veda, Sama Veda, Yajur Veda
and Atharva Veda. The word veda means knowledge of the sacred spiritual knowledge.
These vedas were considered infallible as they imparted the highest spiritual knowledge.
Initially the Vedas were transmitted orally. Since our knowledge of the early Aryans is
based on these Vedas, the culture of this period is referred to as the Vedic Culture. Scholars
divide the vedic period into the earlier and later Vedic period. The earlier is represented by
the Rig Veda while the latter by all other Vedic literature including the Brahmanas, Aranyakas
and Upanishads. Two epics, the Ramayana and the Mahabharata and the Puranas, though
compiled much later, also throw light on the life and society of an earlier period. For this
period archaeological evidence has also been found in some areas of Uttar Pradesh.
Rig Veda contains about 250 hymns in praise of Indra who is described as a destroyer
of cities and there are 200 hymns in praise of God Agni. Do you know that Agni is
looked upon as an intermediary between gods and humans?
Society and religion
Though Aryan society was patriarchal, women were treated with dignity and honour. The family
was the smallest social unit; several families (kula) made a village (grama) and several
villages formed a vis. A number of villages formed a tribe or jana which was ruled by a
chief called rajan. His chief function was to protect the tribe from external attack and
maintain law and order. He was assisted by the members of two councils called sabha and
samiti. The Purohita performed religious functions while the senani looked after military
activities. There was no concept of the state or kingdom at this stage. Although the post of
Rajan had become hereditary, he could be removed from power if found weak and inefficient
or cruel.
Towards the later Vedic period, society was divided into four varnas - Brahamanas,
Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras. This was also called the Varna-Vyavastha. To begin
with it denoted categories of people doing different kinds of functions but with the passage
of time this division became hereditary and rigid. The teachers were called Brahmans, the
ruling class was called Kshatriyas, farmers, merchants and bankers were called Vaishyas
while the artisans, craftsmen, labourers were called Shudras. Moving from one occupation
to another became difficult. Simultaneously, the Brahmans also occupied a dominant position
in the society.
Another important social institution of the time was the system of chaturashrama or the
division of life span into four distinct stages i.e. brahmacharya (period of celibacy, education
and disciplined life in guru’s ashram), grihastha (a period of family life), vanaprastha (a
stage of gradual detachment and sanyasa (a life dedicated to spiritual pursuit away from
worldly life). However it should be noted that these stages were not applicable to women
or to the people of lower varnas. Women were respected by the society, enjoyed freedom,
had access to education and were often free to choose their partners through swayamvara.
Purdah and sati was not prevalent. The ultimate aim of life was to attain moksha or salvation
through the pursuit of dharma, artha and kama. Karma or performance of duty without
any expectation or return was preached in the Bhagavad Gita.
The early Vedic people worshipped forces of nature and personified them as gods and
goddesses. Indra, Agni, Varuna, Marut were some of their gods while Usha:
Aditi, Prithvi
were some of their goddesses. Some of the solar Gods and goddesses referred to in the
Rig Veda are Surya, Savitri and Pushau. Yajna (sacrifice) was performed along with chanting
of Vedic hymns. People poured ghee (clarified butter) and other ingredients into the fire to
invoke the blessings of gods. Agni or fire was looked upon as an intermediary between
Gods and humans. The vedic people prayed individually as well as collectively for the
welfare of the jana.
There was a change in religious practices during the later Vedic period. The prominent
Gods of the early Vedic period like Indra, Agni and Varuna lost their prominence and popularity. Their place was taken by a new trinity of Gods where Brahma enjoyed the
supreme position, while Vishnu became the preserver and Shiva completed the trinity. The
religion became extremely ritualistic. Sanskrit mantras, which were the monopoly of
Brahmins, became an essential part of all religious functions. This made the Brahmins very
powerful and the Yajnas expensive. Participation in them was restricted to the upper three
classes. The kings performed Ashvamedha, Rajasuya and Vajapeya sacrifies to establish
their position. It is very interesting to know that some elements of the culture of the Vedic
Age have survived over a period 3,000 yrs and continues to be a part of Indian culture
even today. By the end of the latter Vedic age changes started occuring in the society. For
the first time people started discussing certain beliefs such as creation of the universe, life
after death and essence of life. These were questions which were dealt with in great detail
in the Upanishads.
Material life and economy
The Aryans were primarily pastoral and agricultural people. They domesticated animals
like cows, horses, sheeps, goats and dogs. They ate simple food consisting of cereals,
pulses, fruits, vegetables, milk and various milk products. They drank a beverage called
Soma. Games of chess, chariot racing etc. were their modes of entertainment.
In the early period there was no money transaction or taxes. Bali or voluntary donation
was prevalent. Cows were the measure of wealth. As the time passed, extensive use of
iron brought great changes in their material life. Iron axes enabled them to clear forests
leading to the expansion of agriculture throughout the Gangetic plains. Iron tools resulted
in varied crafts and technology. Use of iron weapons and horses enabled them to fight
wars and defendthemselves better against enemies. Increasing number of crafts, availability
of surplus food and growth of population led to specialisation of skills and urbanisation.
Towns and cities grew and territorial states emerged. High quality earthenware called
‘Painted Grey Ware’ and ‘Northern Black Polished Ware’ have been found in many areas.
Coins came into circulation. Trade was carried on, both overland and through waterways,
enhancing material prosperity.
By sixth century BC, there were some sixteen large territorial states in North India and
upper Deccan known as Mahajanapadas. Important among them were Anga, Magadha,
Kosala, Kashi, Kuru, and Panchala.
 the next topic is POPULAR RELIGIOUS REFORMS.
This period (B.C. 600 to B.C. 200) is important not only for political unity of the country
but also for cultural unity. Ancient India saw the rise of two very important religions, Jainism
and Buddhism which left a lasting influence on Indian life and culture. Vedic religion was earlier also known as Brahmanism because the Brahmins played a major role in it. Later it
came to be called Hinduism. The Brahmins had developed a vested interest demanding
large charities at the end of the scarifies. As a result, the sacrifices became very costly.
Moreover, the Brahmins considered themselves superior to the other varnas and became
arrogant. This led to the unpopularity of Brahminism and a need for reforms was felt.
Besides, there were other factors like the reaction of the Kshatriyas to the Brahmin claim
for supremacy and the Vaisya’s demand for an improved social position. The Vedic religion
had become very complex and ritualistic. The reforms led by the Kshatriyas and aided by
the poorer masses who could not afford the high cost of sacrifices, resulted in the emergence
of Jainism and Buddhism around sixth century BC. These new religions that is Jainism and
Buddhism also influenced the religious beliefs and several practices of Hinduism.
The founder of Jainism is believed to be Rishabhadeva, the first of the twenty four
tirthankaras and as the last tirthankara Mahavira developed and gave final shape to the
Jain doctrines.
The Jains lay great emphasis on severe penance and asceticism. Lord Mahavira asked
them to take five vows - not to tell lies; not to injure life; not to own property; not to steal;
and to maintain chastity (celibacy). He also asked the Jains to follow the three-fold path of
Right belief, Right Conduct and Right Knowledge.
Later, the Jains were split into two sects the Shvetambaras (white clothed ones) and the
Digambaras (the naked ones). Most of followers of Jainism belong to the trading
community.
The other movement was led by Gautama Buddha (563 - 483 BC), a younger contemporary
of Mahavira. He taught the Four Noble Truths. His path was the middle path. He believed
that there is sorrow in this world and that desire is the cause of that sorrow and it can be
conquered by following the Eight Fold Path (ashtangika marga). The eightfold path
comprises:
(1) Right understanding,
(2) Right thought,
(3) Right speech,
(4) Right action,
(5) Right livelihood,
(6) Right effort,
(7) Right mindfulness
(8) Right concentration.
Basically both these movements were against the orthodax and ritualistic Brahamanical
religion. Both the reformers emphasised a good moral life and the importance of ethics.
Both of them founded an order of monks, established monasteries called sthanakas in
Jainism and viharas in Buddhism.
Later, Buddhism was also split into two divisions- the Hinayana and the Mahayana to
which a third called Vajrayana was added subsequently. Buddhism spread to a very large
part of the world- Sri Lanka, Myanmar, Cambodia, Vietnam, China, Japan, Thailand,
Korea, Mongolia and Afghanistan. Even today a substantial population of these countries
is Buddhist.
Hinduism underwent many changes in history. It gave rise to several religious sects within
itself with varying beliefs and practices. Like Buddhism, some sects of Hinduism also
spread outside India, particularly in the countries of South East Asia. Later Hindu tradition
even accepted the Buddha as one of the incarnations (avatara) of Vishnu.

