ANCIENT INDIA PART 2.
 THE PERSIAN INVASION AND ITS IMPACT ON
 INDIAN CULTURE is our next topic.
In the first half of sixth century BC, there were a number of small tribal states in north west
India. There was no sovereign power to unite these warring tribes. The Achaemenid rulers
of Persia or Iran took advantage of the political disunity of this region. Cyrus, the founder
of the Achaemenid dynasty, and his successor Darius I annexed parts of Punjab and
Sindh. It was believed to be the most fertile and populous part of the Achaemenid empire.
Indian subjects were also enrolled in the Achaemenid army.
The Persian rule in north western India lasted for nearly two centuries. During this period
there must have been regular contact between the two regions. The naval expedition of
Skylax probably encouraged trade and commerce between Persia and India. Some ancient
Persian gold and silver coins have been found in Punjab.
Though the mountainous passes in the north western border were being used from very
early times, it seems that Darius entered India through these passes for the first time. Later
on, a section of Alexander’s army traversed the same route, when he invaded Punjab.
The administrative structure of the Mauryan empire was influenced in some measure by
that of the Achaemenid rulers of Persia. It may be mentioned here that the Persian title of
satrapa (governor) continued to be used by the Indian provincial governors as kshtrapa
for quite a long time.
The cultural effects of the contacts with the Persians were also significant. The Persian
scribes brought into India a new style of writing. It is called kharoshthi. It was derived
from the Aramaic script, which was written from right to left. Many of Asoka’s inscriptions
found in north western India are witten in kharoshthi. This script continued to be used in
north western India till about third century AD. The Persian influence may also be traced in
the preamble of Asokan edicts. The Mauryan art and architecture were also greatly
influenced by the Persian art. The monolithic pillar edicts of Asoka with their bell-shaped
capitals are somewhat like the victory pillars of the Achaemenid emperors which have
been found in Persepolis.
The Persian influence found in Chandragupta Maurya’s court was in the form of the
ceremonial hair bath taken by the emperor on his birthday. It was in typical Persian style.
It is mentioned in the Arthashastra that whenever the king consults the physician or the
ascetic, he should sit in a room where the sacred fire was kept. This indicates the influence
of Zorastrianism, the religion of ancient Iranians.
 let us know about THE GREEK (MACEDONIAN) INVASION AND ITS
 IMPACT ON INDIAN CULTURE
During the fourth century BC, the Greeks and the Persians fought for supremacy over
West Asia. The Achaemenid empire was finally destroyed by the Greeks under the leadership
of Alexander of Macedon. He conquered Asia Minor, Iraq and Iran and then marched
towards India. According to the Greek historian Herodotus, Alexander was greatly attracted
towards India because of her fabulous wealth.
On the eve of Alexander’s invasion, north western India was divided into a number of
small principalities. Lack of unity among them helped the Greeks to conquer these
principalities one after another. However, Alexander’s army refused to march ahead when
they heard about the vast army and the strength of the Nandas of Magadha. Alexander
had to return. He died at Babylon at the young age of 32 on his way back to Macedon.
Alexander hardly had any time to reorganise his conquests. Most of the conquered states
were restored to their rulers, who had submitted to his authority. He divided his territorial
possessions covering parts of eastern Europe and a large area in western Asia into three
parts and placed them under three Greek governors. The eastern part of his empire was
given to Seleucus Nikator, who declared himself a king after the death of his master,
Alexander.
Though the contact between the Macedonians and ancient Indians was for a brief period,
its impact was fairly wide in range. Alexander’s invasion brought Europe, for the first time,
in close contact with India, as routes, by sea and by land, were opened between India and
the West. A close commercial relation was also established. The traders and craftsmen
used to follow these routes. Alexander asked his friend Nearchus to explore the sea coast
from the mouth of the Indus to the Euphrates in search of harbours. The Greek writers
have left many valuable geographical accounts of this region for us.
Alexander’s invasion paved the way for political unification of north western India by
conquering the warring tribes of this region. It seems that by his campaigns Alexander
made Chandragupta Maurya’s work of annexing this area easier. Soon after Alexander’s
departure, Chandragupta defeated one of his generals, Seleucus Nikator and brought the
whole of north western India upto Afghanistan under his control.
The influence of Greek art is found in the development of Indian sculpture as well. The
combination of the Greek and the Indian style formed the Gandhara School of art. Indians
also learnt the art of making well-shaped and beautifully designed gold and silver coins
from the Greeks. The Greeks had some influence on Indian astrology as well.
Many valuable information about the social and economic condition of northern and north
western India of that time are known from the Greek accounts left by Arrian, admiral
Nearchus, and Megasthenes. They tell us about the developed condition of many crafts,
existence of a brisk trade with the outside world, and about the general prosperous condition
of the country. Much has also been said in these accounts of carpentary as a flourishing
trade in India. It seems the fleet which Alexander sent along the western coast of India
under Nearchus was built in India.
Alexander’s adventure also helped the West to know something about the Indian life and
thinking. It has been said that the ideas and notions of Indian philosophy and religion which
filtered into the Roman empire flowed through the channel opened by Alexander.
As the Greek writers left dated records of Alexander’s campaign, it helped us a great deal
to frame the chronology of ancient Indian history. The date of Alexander’s invasion - 326
BC provides a definite ‘marker’ for arranging the sequence of historical events in India.
now we will learn about ASHOKA THE GREAT : REPRESENTING THE ACME
 OF INDIAN CULTURE.
Ashoka occupies a unique place in the history of India. His policies of universal peace,
non-violence and religious harmony find no parallel in the monarchs of the world.
Ashoka stands out as a monarch who combined successful kingship with idealism and
philosophy. Like other rulers, Ashoka too began his reign with war - the conquest of Kalinga. However, the mindless destruction of life and property in this war shattered him
so greatly that he vowed never to wage any war again. Instead he adopted the policy of
Dhamma Vijaya that is conquest through dhamma. In his thirteenth major Rock Edict,
Asoka states that true conquest is by piety and virtue. Such a decision taken by a king,
who lived in an era where military might was the measure of power, earned him a unique
place in history.
Ashoka was a true humanist. His policies were oriented towards the welfare of his people.
His dhamma was based on social responsibility. Besides giving importance to respecting
brahmins, and servants, obedience to elders, abstention from killing living beings, dhamma
also asked people to live in religious harmony. It combined in itself the good points of all
sects. Ashoka proved to be a tolerant monarch who, although himself a Buddhist, never
sought to impose his personal religion on his subjects. In his twelfth major Rock Edict, he
states that in honouring of other sects lies the honour of one’s own sect.
As a king, Ashoka set a very high ideal for himself. He saw himself as a father and the
subjects as his children. He communicated his thoughts and philosophy to his people by
inscribing them on stone pillars and rock surfaces. These edicts are remarkable examples
of Mauryan architecture and also of engineering skills. They are the living monuments of
his times.
Ashoka attempted to educate his subjects by pointing out the wastefulness of expensive
rituals. He asked people to practice ahimsa. He himself gave up the practices of the royal
hunt and pleasure tours and instead began Dhamma Yattas tours for the furtherance of
Dhamma, By giving his empire a common Dhamma, a common language, and practically
one script (Brahmi) he brought further political unification. India has been a secular country
since the Buddhist age. Though he himself became a Buddhist he did not impose it on the
others but followed a tolerant religious policy. He made gifts and grants to non Buddhist as
well as anti-Buddhist.
Ashoka’s fame also rests on the measures that he took to spread the message of peace
amongst the different regions of the world. He sent ambassadors to the Greek kingdoms
and the West. Indian culture spread to far-away lands. According to a Buddhist tradition,
Asoka sent Buddhist missions to regions such as Sri Lanka and Central Asia. Buddhism
spread to different parts of the world and although it is no longer a major force in India
today, yet it continues to be popular in Sri Lanka and the Far Eastern countries.
The Varna system popularly known as the caste system which had arisen in the Vedic Age
now became well established and gradually became the dominant form of social organization
throughout India. Along with the new religions and philosophy the growth of cities, crafts
and trade furthered the process of cultural unity in our country. Asoka unified the entire
country under one empire and renounced the use of war as state policy. On the other hand
he says that he strives to discharge the debt he owes to all living creatures 3.8 ART AND ARCHITECTURE: MAURYAN BEGINNINGS
The Mauryan contribution to art and architecture was significant. Ashoka is known to
have built 84,000 stupas to commemorate various events of Buddha’s life. According to
Megasthenes, Pataliputra’s grandeur matched that of the cities of Persia.
Ashokan edicts were inscribed on stone pillars that were made of single columns of polished
sandstone and had capitals on their top. The best preserved of all Ashokan edicts stands
at Lauriya Nandangarh (Bihar). This thirty-two feet tall column has an almost fifty ton
seated lion capital placed on its top, an engineering feat worth admiring. The bull capital
from Rampura is also another fine example of Mauryan sculpture. The most famous capital
is the one at Sarnath, which shows four lions and the Dharmachakra. You must be familiar
with this as this has been adopted as the national emblem of the Republic of India.
Besides pillars, few Mauryan figures have also come to light. The most well known of
these is the Yakshi from Didarganj. The beauty of these figures lies in the exactness of their
workmanship and in the fact that they. appear to be made from one single stone. Like the
pillars, these figures are polished with a unique surface gloss (now called Mauryan polish).
You will be amazed to know that despite all these centuries this gloss has not lost its shine.
Besides the language that has been used in nearly all the inscriptions and Prakrit which
appears to have become the lingua franca of the country and in the Brahmi script the
earliest known Indian script.
Another noteworthy aspect of Mauryan architecture is the rock cut caves. The Lomash
Rishi (with its impressive entrance) and the Sudama caves are examples of such architecture.
These caves cut from solid rock were provided by Ashoka for non-Buddhist monks.
These caves marked the beginning of the rock cut architecture which was patronised by
later rulers too. His rock edicts were inscribed in the local language and the local script.
3.9 POST - MAURYAN CULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS
Although the Greeks, Shakas, Parthians, and Kushanas were foreigners, they were slowly
absorbed into the local population. Since they were warriors, the law givers assigned them
the status of Kshatriyas. It should be noted that such a large scale assimilation of foreigners
into the Indian society took place only in the post-Mauryan times. We can say roughly
from about 200 BC to about 3rd century A.D. profound changes took place in the economic
and political life and vital developments in different aspects of cultural life of our country
i.e. religion, art and science as well as technology. There was a significant advancement in
foreign trade both by land and by sea, besides emergence of various crafts.
Many foreign rulers adopted Vaishnavism. In the Besnagar Pillar incription, Heliodorus
(the Greek ambassador of the Indo-Greek king Antialkidas) describes himself as a
Bhagavata i.e. worshipper of Vishnu. Similarly some coins of Kanishka also show the figure of Siva on them. You will recall that one of the Kushan rulers was called Vasudeva,
clearly indicating his vaishnava faith. Do you know the importance attached to the year of
Kanishka’s accession i.e. 78 A.D.. Well, it marks the beginning of the Saka era.
The interaction among different foreign ethnic groups and the Indians played an important
role in their choice of one or the other Indian religions. Some foreign rulers also turned to
Buddhism, as this did not create the problems of fitting into the caste system. Menander
converted to Buddhism. Kanishka too is remembered for his services to this religion.
However this increasing popularity of Buddhism brought about a major change in the
religion. Buddhism in its original form was too abstract for the foreigners. They therefore
advocated a simpler form through which they could satisfy their religious cravings. Around
the same time Buddhism split into two schools: the Mahayana or the Great Wheel and the
Hinayana or the Small Wheel. The former believed in image worship, rituals and
Bodhisattvas, (incarnations of Buddha) while the latter continued the practices of the
earlier Buddhism.
The Mahayana received royal patronage from Kanishka, who convened the fourth Buddhist
Council to finalise its teachings. He also set up many stupas in memory of the Buddha.
Art and Sculpture
Central Asian invasions led to further development of Indian art and sculpture. Close
contacts with the western world introduced many new forms in Indian art. The most
significant development was the growth of the Gandhara school of art. This school borrowed
features from both the Greek and Roman art forms. Many images of the Buddha from the
Kushan period have Apollonian faces, their hair is in the Graeco-Roman style and their
draperies arranged in the style of a Roman toga. This assimilation of artistic features was
probably because many artisans from different countries trained in different schools came
together under the Kushan rule.
Mathura, which was the centre of the indigenous school of art, was also influenced by the
invasions. A number of images from here of terracotta and red sandstone, which have
definite Saka-Kushan influence, have survived. The most famous is the headless statue of
Kanishka from Mathura. While the earlier Buddhists had used only symbols to depict the
Buddha, the Mathura school became the first to make faces and figures of the Buddha.
Folklores such as the Jatakas were drawn out in long panels on rock faces. Besides the
images of Buddha, which were made in large numbers, statues of Mahavira were also
produced.
Deccan and South India
The Satavahanas in the Deccan held an important position under the Mauryas. After the
death of Ashoka, they assumed total independence. They became very powerful and
made their capital at Paithan or Pratisthan on the river Godavari. The Satavahanas soon
entered into conflict with the foreign satraps, especially the Shakas. It was under Gautamiputra and his son Vasishthiputra Satkarni that the Satavahanas became very
powerful. They extended their kingdom, cleared forests, made roads and administered
their State well. New towns came up and trade was carried on with far off countries like
Persia, Iraq and Combodia.
Kharavela of Kalinga
Another kingdom which rose to a position of importance after the Mauryas was Kalinga.
Kalinga included modern Orissa and parts of Northern Andhra. Its most important ruler
was Kharavela. The Hathigumpha Inscription in a Jain cave at Udaigiri hills would give us
a detailed account of his reign, but unfortunately it is not easily decipherable. It is definitely
known that he was a graet administrator as well as a brave warrior. He carried out works
of piety and public utility, like building roads and gardens.
South India
The area which lies to the south of the river Krishna and Tungabhadra is called South
India. It was the region of the Cholas, Cheras and the Pandyas who were constantly at
war with each other.
Sources
The main source of information about these kingdoms and the life of the people is the
Sangam literature. That is why this period from the beginning of the Ist century B.C. to the
end of 2nd century A.D. is called the Sangam period of the history of South India.
Cholas
Karikala was the most important ruler of this kingdom. He defeated the combined forces
of the Cheras and the Pandays. He succeeded in pushing back an invasion from Ceylon.
Karikala has been credited with many welfare activities.He got may canals dug so that
water from the river Cauvery could be used for irrigation purposes. Karikala patronised
works of literature and art. He was a follower of the Vedic religion.
Pandays
The Pandyan empire was founded by a woman king. She maintained a huge army. She
also encouraged trade and patronised art as well as literature.
Life and Culture
The people during this period lived a simple life. They were fond of music, dancing and
poetry. Many musical instruments like drums, flutes, pipes, etc. were popular.
Most of the people lived in valleys and a majority of them were farmers. Others were
herdsmen. There were artisans and craftsmen also who mainly lived in towns. There were
merchants specially in the coastal areas and trade was carried on by sea.
Society
The Greeks, Kushanas, Shakas and Parthians were called Yavanas. They soon merged
with the Indian society and adopted Indian names and inter-married. Even their coins
started carrying the images of Indian gods like Vishnu, Ganesha and Mahesha. The fact
that they had adapted to the Indian society easily may explain why foreign rulers patronised
Buddhism.
