Welcome to Vision - User Manual. It is a learning APP for visually challenged. You can use it using your voice. Please listen to menu options properly before you select any option by voice command. When you are entering the app as a new user you need to get your user name and password from your teacher or admin. Once you install the app and click on the Icon, the app will open with its logo followed by authentication screen. User has to enter his user name followed by password using voice.Authenticated user will be read out with five options of Main Menu to choose one of them by saying the corresponding number. 1 for Read Text Books, 2 for Scan & Read, 3 for News Headlines, 4 for Test Yourself and 5 for Support. On selecting option 1 User can select text book of his preference from the preloaded set of books. The selected book will be read out for the user   to listen and understand.The book will be read Line by line in a convenient pace so that the user will be able to follow it properly. Additional books can be loaded by the teachers in the form of (.txt) files with proper file name. On selecting option 2 of Main menu user will be enabled with a scanner camera screen which can be focussed on any of the following and long pressed anywhere on the screen to read it aloud. Visiting Card, Printed or Hand written Text, Currency Notes, Bus or Train Information Boards, Bills, Product Mfg. or Exp. Details, Digital Sign Boards, Posters & Banners, Auto or Taxi Meters & ID Card, Tag Etc., On selecting option 3 of Main Menu user will be able to get the news Headlines from the Leading News agencies. He can listen to News one by one, repeat the reading, move previous or forward with simple touches. He or she will be listed out with options on categories of NEWS to select one among them. Categories may be like General, Sports, Entertainment, Business, Life & Style, Science, World, Health, Education & Environment Etc. With future modification, the App can be customized to select the choice of Newspaper, State and Edition.On selecting option 4 of Main Menu the user will be able to select the choice of topic for his evaluation by voice command.Once selected he will be read out with the passage followed by objective type questions based on the passage and his prerequisite knowledge on the topic. Selecting correct answer on his first attempt he will get 3 marks, 2 marks for second attempt and 1 mark for the final attempt. Gamification is introduced in this module by grades and storing his top score for future reference and comparison with the other users. Lessons and corresponding Questions & Answers can be loaded by the Teachers.The User will be entering Support module of the App by selecting Option 5 of Main Menu Authenticated user will be read out with three options to choose one of them by saying the corresponding number. Volume to Increase or Decrease the sound, User Manual Help for App Usage, About mention Credits and Creators of vision App. Thank you for using Vision app. Now Go and Explore the app. 

   



